\documentclass[11pt,oneside,a4paper]{article}
\usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\usepackage{fullpage}
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{amssymb}
\usepackage{latexsym}
\usepackage[pdftex,colorlinks]{hyperref}
\hypersetup{colorlinks=false}

\title{Visualization of $\beta$-reduction-graphs in the lambda calculus}
\author{Jens Duelund Pallesen \and
Niels Bj√∏rn Bugge Grathwohl}
\date{2010-02-10}

\begin{document}
\maketitle

% Contents of the project

The aim of the project is to develop a method to visualize reduction graphs in
the lambda calculus, so that they are ``pretty'' and informative for theoretical
computer scientists. This includes: developing a parser for some notation of
the lambda calculus, developing a program that can compute the reduction
graphs, and developing a program that, given a reduction graph, can visualize
it in an intuitive (for theoretical computer scientists) way.

% Expected result 

The expected result is a program that takes as input a lambda term and draws
the $\beta$-reduction-graph as it develops after each iteration of reductions.
A reduction graph visualization can thus be regarded as a ``film'', with each
frame depicting the look of the reduction graph after reduction $n$.

% Why is the project useful? 

Our program is supposed to be used by researchers to infer knowledge about
pros and cons of a reduction strategy or of a certain lambda term, while also
providing inspiration for further investigations into previously unknown
peculiarities or problems with a certain reduction strategy.

Thus far there doesn't exist a proper, automatic way of visualizing these
graphs. Researchers are limited to what they themselves can draw or imagine,
and as reduction graphs becomes huge, this becomes a difficult task. 

% What is particularly difficult/of high risk?

Because reduction graphs very often tend to become huge, there arises the
problem of deciding whether they can be drawn on a plane at all. We'll perhaps
have to develop routines for deciding this, along with routines for reordering
the graph. Alternatively, a set of ``best practices'' for drawing the nodes
could be developed that would minimize the amount of crossing edges as the
film progresses forward. Yet more alternatively, methods for 3D-drawing could
be considered. However, this will demand great care when determining the look
of the images, as a 3-dimensional rendering of a large graph very easily could
inhibit understanding and confuse the beholder, which is the opposite of what
we are working towards.

Furthermore, there is a design choice to be made whether each frame of the
film should be drawn immediately after the reduction step has been completed,
making the film rendering and the term reductions synchronized, or whether the
rendering should begin only after all desired (or possible) reductions have
been computed.


\end{document}
